---
layout: post
---

# A nice chunk of useful tips for unix:

## Bash
* In bash, `ctrl-r` searches your command history as you type.
* Input from the commandline as if it were a file by replacing `command < file.in` with `command <<< "some input text"`:
* `^` is a sed-like operator to replace chars from last command:  
	`ls docs; ^docs^web^` is equal to `ls web`.  
	The second argument can be empty.
* `!!:n` selects the nth argument of the last command, and `!$` the last arg:
	`ls file1 file2 file3; cat !!:1-2` shows all files and cats only 1 and 2.
* `nohup ./long_script &` to leave stuff in background even if you logout.
* `cd -` to change to the previous directory you were working on.
* `Ctrl-x Ctrl-e` opens an editor to work with long or complex command lines.
* Add `set editing-mode vi` in your ~/.inputrc to use the vi keybindings for bash and all readline-enabled applications (python, mysql, etc).

## Pseudo aliases for commonly used long commands
* `function lt() { ls -ltrsa "$@" | tail; }`
* `function psgrep() { ps axuf | grep -v grep | grep "$@" -i --color=auto; }`
* `function fname() { find . -iname "*$@*"; }`

## Tools
* `htop` instead of `top`.
* `ranger` is a nice console file manager for vi fans.
* Use `apt-file` to see which package provides that file you`re missing.
* `dict` is a commandline dictionary.
* `trash-cli` sends files to the trash instead of deleting them forever.
* `sort | uniq` to check for duplicate lines.
* `echo start_backup.sh | at midnight` starts a command at the specified time.
* Pipe any command over `column -t` to nicely align the columns.
* `diff --side-by-side fileA.txt fileB.txt | pager` to see a nice diff.
* learn to use `pushd` to save time navigating folders.
* run jobs in parallel easily: `ls \*.png | parallel -j4 convert {} {.}.jpg`.

## Networking
* `python -m SimpleHTTPServer 8080` shares all the files in the current folder over HTTP, port 8080.
* `ssh -R 12345:localhost:22 server.com "sleep 1000; exit"` forwards server.com's port 12345 to your local ssh port, even if you machine is not externally visible on the net. Now you can `ssh localhost -p 12345` from server.com and you will log into your machine.
	`sleep` avoids getting kicked out from server.com for inactivity.
* `socat TCP4-LISTEN:1234,fork TCP4:192.168.1.1:22` forwards your port 1234 to another machine`s port 22. Very useful for quick NAT redirection.
* `lsof -i` monitors network connections in real time.
* `iftop` shows bandwith usage per *connection*.
* `nethogs` shows the bandwith usage per *process*.
* Pipe a compressed file over ssh to avoid creating large temporary .tgz files:  
	`tar cz folder/ | ssh server "tar xz"` or even better, use `rsync`.
* ssmtp can use a Gmail account as SMTP and send emails from the command line:  
	`echo "Hello, User!" | mail user@domain.com`  
	Configure your /etc/ssmtp/ssmtp.conf:

``` ini
root=<email>
mailhub=smtp.gmail.com:587
rewriteDomain=
hostname=smtp.gmail.com:587
UseSTARTTLS=YES
UseTLS=YES
AuthUser=<email>
AuthPass=<password>
AuthMethod=LOGIN
FromLineOverride=YES

```
-~-
(CC) by-nc, Carles Fenollosa <carles.fenollosa@bsc.es>  
Retrieved from <http://mmb.pcb.ub.es/~carlesfe/unix/tricks.txt>  
Last modified: lun 11 mar 2013 05:13:37 CET  
Taken from <http://mmb.pcb.ub.es/~carlesfe/unix/tricks.txt>
